Rework ECC documentation (#279)
sehlen-bsi/botan-docs: docs/cryptodoc/src/05_03_ecc.rst

Elliptic Curve Cryptography
===========================

Elliptic Curve Groups
---------------------

> Botan implements the elliptic curve standard [ISO-15946-1]_ for ellipic curves

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Botan implements the elliptic curve standard [ISO-15946-1]_ for elliptic curves
```

over :math:`\mathbb{F}_p`. The standard additionally defines curves over
:math:`\mathbb{F}_{2^m}` and :math:`\mathbb{F}_{3^m}` that are not implemented.

> See :srcref:`src/build-data/ec_groups.txt` for a list of supported curves and
> its parameters. All curves recommended in [TR-02102-1]_ are included.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See :srcref:`src/build-data/ec_groups.txt` for a list of supported curves and
their parameters. All curves recommended in [TR-02102-1]_ are included.
```

   | :math:`a, b \in \mathbb{F}_p`                    | curve coefficients in short Weierstrass form            |
   +--------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
   | :math:`E_{a,b}: y^2 = x^3 + a \cdot x + b`       | the curve equation                                      |
   +--------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
   | :math:`G_{x,y}` on :math:`E_{a,b}(\mathbb{F}_p)` | the base point of the curve :math:`E_{a,b}`             |
   +--------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
   | :math:`n = ord(G_{x,y})`                         | the order of the base point :math:`G_{x,y}`             |
   +--------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
   | :math:`h = \#E_{a,b}(\mathbb{F}_p)/n`            | the cofactor of the curve (always :math:`1` in Botan)   |
   +--------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+

> For most common named curves [#supported_curves]_, Botan provides optimized

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the most common named curves [#supported_curves]_, Botan provides optimized
```

implementations in its internal :srcref:`"pcurves" library
<src/lib/math/pcurves>`. Those utilize optimizations that leverage
curve-specific mathematical features for efficient modular reduction and field
inversions where possible.

For less commonly used or user-defined curves, a legacy implementation is

> available in :srcref:`src/lib/pubkey/ec_group/`. Since Botan 3.7.1 this
> implementation is deprecated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
available in :srcref:`src/lib/pubkey/ec_group/`. Since Botan 3.7.1, this
implementation is deprecated.
```

Note that the detailed algorithm descriptions in the rest of this chapter always
refer to the optimized "pcurves" implementation. The previous implementation that
is used for custom curve parameters was the basis for previous revisions of this
document and was not changed significantly.

User-defined elliptic curve parameters can be imported at run time. However, it
is the application developer's responsibility to ensure that such custom curves
are trustworthy and cryptographically strong. Botan *does not* contain means to
ensure that automatically. It does however pose restrictions on the custom curve
parameters:

 - The modulus :math:`p` is prime and must be at least 192 bits (128 bits is

>    allowed, but deprecated) and at most 512 bits. The bitlength must be a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   allowed, but deprecated) and at most 512 bits. The bit length must be a
```

   | Type/Location                                            | Purpose                                                                                                             |
   +==========================================================+=====================================================================================================================+
   | ``EC_Group``                                             |                                                                                                                     |
   | (:srcref:`code <[src/lib/pubkey/ec_group]/ec_group.h>`)  | An instance of elliptic curve group parameters specifying a group domain.                                           |
   +----------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   | ``EC_Scalar``                                            |                                                                                                                     |

>    | (:srcref:`code <[src/lib/pubkey/ec_group]/ec_scalar.h>`) | An arbitrary precision integer in the context of an ``EC_Group``, i.e. modulo the group's prime order ``n``.        |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   | (:srcref:`code <[src/lib/pubkey/ec_group]/ec_scalar.h>`) | An arbitrary precision integer in the context of an ``EC_Group``, i.e., modulo the group's prime order ``n``.       |
```

   +----------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   | ``EC_AffinePoint``                                       |                                                                                                                     |
   | (:srcref:`code <[src/lib/pubkey/ec_group]/ec_apoint.h>`) | An affine curve point in the context of an ``EC_Group``. Ensures that the contained point is always "on the curve". |
   +----------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Private Data Structures
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This is a non-exhaustive list of data structures and types used internally. These

> are not accessible by an application using the library. For further detail, please

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are not accessible by an application using the library. For further details, please
```

   | ``AffineCurvePoint``                                                                                | Curve specific representation of an affine point with coordinates :math:`x,y \in \mathbb{F}_p`.                                                                                                                                                      |
   | (:srcref:`code <[src/lib/math/pcurves/pcurves_impl]/pcurves_impl.h:706|AffineCurvePoint>`)          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
   +-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

>    | ``ProjectiveCurvePoint``                                                                            | Curve specific implementation of a projective point using Jacobian coordinates :math:`x,y,z \in \mathbb{F}_p`. Provides foundational point algorithms, such as addition and doubling.                                                                |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   | ``ProjectiveCurvePoint``                                                                            | Curve-specific implementation of a projective point using Jacobian coordinates :math:`x,y,z \in \mathbb{F}_p`. Provides foundational point algorithms, such as addition and doubling.                                                                |
```

   | (:srcref:`code <[src/lib/math/pcurves/pcurves_impl]/pcurves_impl.h:879|ProjectiveCurvePoint>`)      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
   +-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

>    | ``IntMod``                                                                                          | Curve specific representation of an integer modulo a prime (either :math:`p` for field elements, or :math:`n` for scalar arithmetics). Provides fondational modular arithmetics algorithms and a customization point for curve specific reductions.  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   | ``IntMod``                                                                                          | Curve-specific representation of an integer modulo a prime (either :math:`p` for field elements, or :math:`n` for scalar arithmetics). Provides foundational modular arithmetics algorithms and a customization point for curve-specific reductions. |
```

   | (:srcref:`code <[src/lib/math/pcurves/pcurves_impl]/pcurves_impl.h:145|IntMod>`)                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
   +-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

>    | ``EllipticCurve``                                                                                   | Trait type for the concrete elliptic curve, its parameters and helper structures. Provides customization points for curve specific field inversion algorithms.                                                                                       |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   | ``EllipticCurve``                                                                                   | Trait type for the concrete elliptic curve, its parameters and helper structures. Provides customization points for curve-specific field inversion algorithms.                                                                                       |
```

   | ``WindowedMulTable``                                                                                | Allows precomputing a multiplication table for generic point multiplication using a fixed window of some bit length :math:`W`. The online phase performs only double and add operations                                                              |
   | (:srcref:`code <[src/lib/math/pcurves/pcurves_impl]/pcurves_impl.h:1693|WindowedMulTable>`)         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
   +-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

>    | ``WindowedMul2Table``                                                                               | Allows precomputating a multiplication table for 2-ary point multiplication as a windowed variant of "Shamir's Trick" of some window bit length :math:`W`.                                                                                           |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   | ``WindowedMul2Table``                                                                               | Allows precomputing a multiplication table for 2-ary point multiplication as a windowed variant of "Shamir's Trick" of some window bit length :math:`W`.                                                                                           
  |
```

Finally, the projective Jacobian coordinate representation of the accumulator is
randomized for the first few window applications if a seeded random number
generator is available.

For links to the implementations see ``PrecomputedBaseMulTable`` and
``WindowedMulTable`` in the table above.

.. _pubkey/ecc/scalar_mul2:

2-ary Multiplication of Scalars p, q and Points X, Y
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The 2-ary multiplication of the form :math:`p \cdot X + q \cdot Y` is
implemented using a windowed variant of what is known as "Shamir's Trick". As an
optimization the multiplication table may be precomputed and cached. This is
particularly useful when performing multiple signature verifications under the
same public point :math:`Q`. In this case, the precomputation is performed for
:math:`X = G` (the group's generator) and :math:`Y = Q`. For such precomputed and
cached tables, the window size is 3 bits. For generic one-shot precomputations, it
is 2 bits.

The online phase of this 2-ary multiplication table *is not side-channel
silent*, as it is typically used for signature verification where no parameter

> is secret. Though, an additional implementation applying the same counter

Author: ```
The online phase of this 2-ary multiplication table *is not side-channel
silent*, as it is typically used for signature verification where no parameter is secret.
```

"where no parameter is secret".... am I missing something?

> is secret. Though, an additional implementation applying the same counter

Reviewer: Right... I may have stumbled over the word _typically_. Maybe we want something like:
`The online phase of this 2-ary multiplication table *is not side-channel
silent*. Hence, it is only used for non-secret-depending operations like signature verification.`

> is secret. Though, an additional implementation applying the same counter

Author: Fair. The paragraph now reads:

```
The online phase of this 2-ary multiplication table *is not side-channel
silent*. However, it is used for only operations that don't handle secret values
such as signature verification. An additional implementation applying the same
countermeasures as the ordinary scalar multiplication is available. This may be
useful when implementing cryptographic schemes such as sPAKE, but it is
currently not used in the elliptic curve algorithms outlined below.
```

> is secret. Though, an additional implementation applying the same counter
> measures as the ordinary scalar multiplication is available. This may be useful

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is secret. Though, an additional implementation applying the same countermeasures
as the ordinary scalar multiplication is available. This may be useful
```

   **Steps:**

   1. Sample parameter k as a random number :math:`0 < k < n` from ``rng`` using
      the algorithm described in Section :ref:`pubkey_param/rng`.

>    2. Compute point :math:`W_{x,y} = k \cdot G` (see :ref:`pubkey/ecc/scalar_mul`)
>    3. Compute the witness :math:`r = h(x)` , where :math:`h` is the hash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   2. Compute point :math:`W_{x,y} = k \cdot G` (see :ref:`pubkey/ecc/scalar_mul`)
   3. Compute the witness :math:`r = h(W_x)` , where :math:`h` is the hash
```

Signature Creation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The signature generation algorithm works as follows (see
:srcref:`[src/lib/pubkey/ecgdsa]/ecgdsa.cpp:60|raw_sign`):

.. admonition:: ``ECGDSA_Signature_Operation::raw_sign()``

   **Input:**

>    -  ``m``: raw bytes to sign (digest of the data hashed with a user-defined

Reviewer: More consistent with the input for verification:
```suggestion
   -  :math:`m`: digest of message bytes (using a user-defined hash function)
```

   **Steps:**

>    1. Truncate ``m`` to be at most :math:`length(n)` bits long.
>    2. Sample parameter ``k`` as a random number :math:`0 < k < n` from ``rng``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   1. Truncate :math:`m` to be at most :math:`length(n)` bits long.
   2. Sample parameter :math:`k` as a random number :math:`0 < k < n` from ``rng``
```

      using the algorithm described in Section :ref:`pubkey_param/rng` .

>    3. Compute point :math:`W_{x,y} = k \cdot G` (see :ref:`pubkey/ecc/scalar_mul`)

Reviewer: Alternatively:
```suggestion
   3. Compute point :math:`W = k \cdot G` (see :ref:`pubkey/ecc/scalar_mul`)
```
Let's just stay consistent with the other algorithms, which ever variant you prefer 👍

   4. Set :math:`r = W_x \bmod n`

>    5. Compute :math:`s = d \cdot (k \cdot r - m) \bmod n`.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if this is a problem: Above, we write `m: raw bytes` and then we use $m$ as it would be a scalar. I think it's clear what we mean, but hardline mathematicians may want to see a conversion function or an informal statement that $m$ is interpreted as a scalar for this.

Author: Agreed. I extended the first point as:

```
   1. Truncate :math:`m` to be at most :math:`length(n)` bits long and interpret
      it as a big-endian encoded scalar.
```

   6. If :math:`s = 0` or :math:`r = 0` applies, the algorithm terminates with
      an error.

>    7. Return ECGDSA signature (r,s).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   7. Return ECGDSA signature :math:`(r,s)`.
```

Signature Verification
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The signature verification algorithm works as follows (see
:srcref:`[src/lib/pubkey/ecgdsa]/ecgdsa.cpp:97|verify`):

.. admonition:: ``ECGDSA_Verification_Operation::verify()``

   **Input:**

>    -  ``m``: digest of message bytes (using a user-defined hash function)
>    -  EC_Publickey: :math:`Q`, curve group parameters (``a``, ``b``, ``p``, ``G``, ``n``, ``h = 1``)
>    -  (``r``, ``s``): ECGDSA signature

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   -  :math:`m`: digest of message bytes (using a user-defined hash function)
   -  EC_Publickey: :math:`Q`, curve group parameters  :math:`(a, b, p, G, n, h = 1)`
   -   :math:`(r, s)`: ECGDSA signature
```

   7. Return ECGDSA signature :math:`(r,s)`.

Signature Verification
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The signature verification algorithm works as follows (see
:srcref:`[src/lib/pubkey/ecgdsa]/ecgdsa.cpp:97|verify`):

.. admonition:: ``ECGDSA_Verification_Operation::verify()``

   **Input:**

   -  :math:`m`: digest of message bytes (using a user-defined hash function)
   -  EC_Publickey: :math:`Q`, curve group parameters :math:`(a, b, p, G, n, h = 1)`
   -   :math:`(r, s)`: ECGDSA signature

   **Output:**

   -  ``true``, if the signature for message ``m`` is valid. ``false`` otherwise

   **Steps:**

   1. Deserialize the signature into :math:`r` and :math:`s`

      1. Perform preliminary parameter checks and verify that
         :math:`0 < r < n` and :math:`0 < s < n` applies.

   2. Truncate :math:`m` to be at most :math:`length(n)` bits long.
   3. Compute :math:`r^{-1} \bmod n` (potentially using a variable time inversion algorithm)
   4. Compute :math:`v_{1} = r^{-1} \cdot m \bmod n`
      and :math:`v_{2} = r^{-1} \cdot s \bmod n`.
   5. Compute point :math:`W_{x,y} = v_{1} \cdot G + v_{2} \cdot Q`. This operation is *not side-channel silent* (see :ref:`pubkey/ecc/scalar_mul2`)

>    6. Return ``true`` if :math:`r \equiv x \bmod n` applies, otherwise ``false``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   6. Return ``true`` if :math:`r \equiv W_x \bmod n` applies, otherwise ``false``.
```

   **Steps:**

   1. Deserialize the signature into :math:`r` and :math:`s`

      1. Perform preliminary parameter checks and verify that
         :math:`0 < r < n` and :math:`0 < s < n` applies.

>    2. Truncate ``m`` to be at most :math:`length(n)` bits long.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   2. Truncate :math:`m` to be at most :math:`length(n)` bits long.
```

   3. Compute :math:`r^{-1} \bmod n` (potentially using a variable time inversion algorithm)
   4. Compute :math:`v_{1} = r^{-1} \cdot m \bmod n`
      and :math:`v_{2} = r^{-1} \cdot s \bmod n`.

>    5. Compute point :math:`W_{x,y} = v_{1} \cdot G + v_{2} \cdot Q`. This operation is *not side-channel silent* (see :ref:`pubkey/ecc/scalar_mul2`)
>    6. Return ``true`` if :math:`r \equiv x \bmod n` applies, otherwise ``false``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   5. Compute point :math:`W = v_{1} \cdot G + v_{2} \cdot Q`. This operation is *not side-channel silent* (see :ref:`pubkey/ecc/scalar_mul2`)
   6. Return ``true`` if :math:`r \equiv W_x \bmod n` applies, otherwise ``false``.
```
